Agenda 12/1

1) Check project outlines while you share yours with 
neighbors - I’ll collect any that you want more detailed 
feedback on
2) Start Development Powerpoint –watch video and do 
slides 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_22CFCxDUy0
Note - during slides take notes when indicated to study for 
quiz
Homework  - 
●Finish 18.4 and 47.3 notes, concept checks due 
tomorrow, online assignment due Wed
●Short Quiz Wed.
●Ch. 14 Notes and concept checks due Friday, Ch. 14 online 
assignment due Monday (long! 2 hours)

Development occurs at many points in the life cycle 
of an animal

●This includes metamorphosis and gamete 
production, as well as embryonic development

●Although animals display different body plans, they 
share many basic mechanisms of development and 
use a common set of regulatory genes

●Biologists use model organisms to study 
development, chosen for the ease with which they 
can be studied in the laboratory
●

Fertilization

●Molecules and events at the egg surface play a 
crucial role in each step of fertilization

●Sperm penetrate the protective layer around the 

egg

●Receptors on the egg surface bind to molecules 

on the sperm surface

●Changes at the egg surface prevent polyspermy, 

the entry of multiple sperm nuclei into the egg

Cleavage

●Fertilization is followed by cleavage, a period of 
rapid cell division without growth
●Cleavage partitions the cytoplasm of one large cell 
into many smaller cells called blastomeres
●The solid ball of cells is called a morula
●The blastula is a ball of cells with a fluid-filled cavity 
called a blastocoel

●A blastocoel forms within the morula → 
blastula

Yolk least 
concentrated here, 
also may become 
anterior side of 
animal

Polarity (common in 
animals beside 
mammals) 
determines planes of 
cleavage.

Yolk most 
concentrated here

 ●The three layers produced by gastrulation are called 
embryonic germ layers

●The ectoderm forms the outer layer 
●The endoderm lines the digestive tract
●The mesoderm partly fills the space between the 

endoderm and ectoderm

●Each germ layer contributes to specific structures in 
the adult animal

Go to study area online – Ch. 47

●Watch video of sea urchin development

Organogenesis

●During organogenesis, various regions of the germ 
layers develop into rudimentary organs
●Early in vertebrate organogenesis, the notochord 
forms from mesoderm, and the neural plate forms 
from ectoderm

NOW – WATCH FROG DEVELOPMENT VIDEO 
FROM WEBSITE – ALSO FETAL ULTRASOUNDS

c. Programmed cell death (apoptosis) plays a role in the normal
   development and differentiation.

Students should be able to demonstrate understanding of the above
concept by using an illustrative example such as:
• Morphogenesis of fingers and toes
• Immune function
• C. elegans development
• Flower development

✘✘ Names of the specific stages of embryonic development are 
beyond the scope of the course and the AP Exam.

Programmed Cell Death

●Programmed cell death is also called apoptosis
●At various times during development, individual 
cells, sets of cells, or whole tissues stop developing 
and are engulfed by neighboring cells
●For example, many more neurons are produced in 
developing embryos than will be needed

-Extra neurons are removed by apoptosis

●Another example is the morphogenesis of fingers 
and toes (cells between undergo apoptosis)

Apoptosis (Cell suicide) and Normal 
Development
●A built-in cell suicide mechanism is essential to 
development in all animals.

● Similarities between the apoptosis genes in 

mammals and nematodes indicate that the basic 
mechanism evolved early in animal evolution.

● The timely activation of apoptosis proteins in some 

cells functions during normal development and 
growth in both embryos and adults.
● It is part of the normal development of the nervous 

system, normal operation of the immune system, 
and for normal morphogenesis of human hands and 
feet.

Copyright © 2002 Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Benjamin Cummings

●Problems with the cell suicide mechanism 
may have health consequences, ranging from 
minor to serious.

● Failure of normal cell death during 

morphogenesis of the hands and feet can result 
in webbed fingers and toes.

● Researchers are also investigating the possibility 

that certain degenerative diseases of the 
nervous system result from inappropriate 
activation of the apoptosis genes.

● Others are investigating the possibility that some 
cancers result from a failure of cell suicide which 
normally occurs if the cell has suffered 
irreparable damage, especially DNA damage.

Agenda 12/2

●Warm- up:  Describe and name the major stages of embryological 
development starting with fertilization
●Continue development through bicoid - I check notes during this
●Practice questions
●Start 47.3 slides – aim to get through fate mapping

●Homework – 
●Online assignment due tomorrow
●Study for small quiz tomorrow- 47.3 and 18.4
●Ch. 14 Notes and concept checks due Friday, Ch. 14 online 
assignment due Monday (long! 2hrs.)

Concept 18.4: A program of differential 
gene expression leads to the different cell 

types in a multicellular organism

●During embryonic development, a fertilized egg 
gives rise to many different cell types
●Cell types are organized successively into tissues, 
organs, organ systems, and the whole organism
●Gene expression orchestrates the developmental 
programs of animals

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Genes and Development

Differential gene expression leads to different cell 
types in multicellular organisms
●Zygote undergoes transformation through 3 
interrelated cell processes

1. Cell division – mitosis increases # of cells
2. Morphogenesis – organization of cells into tissues 

and organs

3. Cell differentiation – cells become specialized in 

structure and function

What are the terms that describe an embryo going 

through these stages?  

●Cell differentiation is the process by which cells 

become specialized in structure and function

●The physical processes that give an organism its 

shape constitute morphogenesis

●Differential gene expression results from genes 

being regulated differently in each cell type

●Materials in the egg can set up gene regulation 

that is carried out as cells divide

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Cytoplasmic Determinants and 

Inductive Signals

TAKE NOTES
●An egg’s cytoplasm contains RNA, proteins, and 
other substances that are distributed unevenly in the 
unfertilized egg
●Cytoplasmic determinants are maternal 
substances in the egg that influence early 
development
●As the zygote divides by mitosis, cells contain 
different cytoplasmic determinants, which lead to 
different gene expression

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

TAKE NOTES

●The other important source of developmental 
information is the environment around the cell, 
especially signals from nearby embryonic cells
●In the process called induction, signal molecules 
from embryonic cells cause transcriptional changes 
in nearby target cells
●Thus, interactions between cells induce 
differentiation of specialized cell types

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Sequential Regulation of Gene 

Expression During Cellular 

Differentiation

●Determination commits a cell to its final fate
●Determination precedes differentiation
●Cell differentiation is marked by the production of 
tissue-specific proteins

TAKE NOTES

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Pattern Formation: Setting Up the 

Body Plan

●Pattern formation is the development of a spatial 
organization of tissues and organs
●In animals, pattern formation begins with the 
establishment of the major axes
●Positional information, the molecular cues that 
control pattern formation, tells a cell its location 
relative to the body axes and to neighboring cells

KNOW THESE VOCAB WORDS 
–THEY SHOULD BE IN YOUR 
CORNELL NOTES

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

GENETIC ANALYSIS OF EARLY 
DEVELOPMENT: SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY

●Edward B. Lewis, Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard, and 
Eric Wieschaus won a Nobel Prize in 1995 for 
decoding pattern formation in Drosophila
●Lewis discovered the homeotic genes, which 
control pattern formation in late embryo, larva, and 
adult stages
●They found 120 genes essential for normal 
segmentation

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Axis Establishment

●Maternal effect genes encode for cytoplasmic 
determinants that initially establish the axes of the 
body of Drosophila
●These maternal effect genes are also called egg-
polarity genes because they control orientation of 
the egg and consequently the fly

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Ch. 18 slide 106

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Animation: Development of Head-Tail Axis in Fruit Flies
Right-click slide / select “Play”

Bicoid: A Morphogen Determining Head 
Structures
●One maternal effect gene, the bicoid gene, affects 
the front half of the body
●An embryo whose mother has no functional bicoid 
gene lacks the front half of its body and has 
duplicate posterior structures at both ends

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

●This phenotype suggests that the product of the 
mother’s bicoid gene is concentrated at the future 
anterior end
●This hypothesis is an example of the morphogen 
gradient hypothesis, in which gradients of 
substances called morphogens establish an 
embryo’s axes and other features

TAKE NOTES – KNOW BICOID 
EXAMPLE

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

●The bicoid research is important for three reasons

– It identified a specific protein required for some 

early steps in pattern formation

– It increased understanding of the mother’s role 

in embryo development

– It demonstrated a key developmental principle 
that a gradient of molecules can determine polarity 
and position in the embryo

PAUSE HERE FOR STUDY 
BREAK

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Essential knowledge 2.E.1: Timing and coordination of specific events are
necessary for the normal development of an organism, and these events

are regulated by a variety of mechanisms.

a. Observable cell differentiation results from the expression of genes
    for tissue-specific proteins.

b. Induction of transcription factors during development results in
    sequential gene expression.

Evidence of student learning is a demonstrated understanding of each
of the following:

1. Homeotic genes are involved in developmental patterns and
    sequences.
2. Embryonic induction in development results in the correct
    timing of events.
3. Temperature and the availability of water determine seed
    germination in most plants.
4. Genetic mutations can result in abnormal development.
5. Genetic transplantation experiments support the link between
    gene expression and normal development.
6. Genetic regulation by microRNAs plays an important role
    in the development of organisms and the control of cellular
    functions.

Learning Objectives

LO 2.31 The student can connect concepts in and across domains to show that 
timing and coordination of specific events are necessary for normal 
development in an organism and that these events are regulated by multiple  
mechanisms. [See SP 7.2]

LO 2.32 The student is able to use a graph or diagram to analyze situations or 
solve problems (quantitatively or qualitatively) that involve timing and 
coordination of events necessary for normal development in an organism. [See 
SP 1.4]

LO 2.33 The student is able to justify scientific claims with scientific evidence to 
show that timing and coordination of several events are necessary for normal 
development in an organism and that these events are regulated by multiple 
mechanisms. [See SP 6.1]

LO 2.34 The student is able to describe the role of programmed cell death in 
development and differentiation, the reuse of molecules, and the maintenance 
of dynamic homeostasis. [See SP 7.1]

Essential knowledge 4.A.3: Interactions between 
external stimuli and regulated gene expression result 
in specialization of cells, tissues and organs.

a.Differentiation in development is due to external and internal cues that 
trigger gene regulation by proteins that bind to DNA. [See also 3.B.1, 3. 
B.2]
b.  Structural and functional divergence of cells in development is due
     to expression of genes specific to a particular tissue or organ type.
 
c. Environmental stimuli can affect gene expression in a mature cell.

[See also 3.B.1, 3.B.2]

[See also 3.B.1, 3.B.2]

Learning Objective:
LO 4.7 The student is able to refine representations to illustrate
how interactions between external stimuli and gene expression
result in specialization of cells, tissues and organs. [See SP 1.3]

12/3

●Study 5 min
●Quiz (15 min)
●Finish 47.3 slides (35 min) - students explain pictures
●If finish, start Genetics practice

Homework – 
Genetics practice packet pg. 1 due tomorrow
Ch. 14 Notes and concept checks due Friday, Ch. 14 online 
assignment due Monday (long! 2hrs)
Ch. 15 Notes, concept checks due next Thurs and online assignment 
due next Friday
●Next Unit Test (Ch. 11-15, 18.4, 47.3) approx. 12/16, be working on 
review manual chapters 11-15 (will be collected day of test)
●

Concept 47.3: Cytoplasmic 

determinants and inductive signals 
contribute to cell fate specification
●Determination is the term used to describe the 
process by which a cell or group of cells becomes 
committed to a particular fate
●Differentiation refers to the resulting specialization 
in structure and function

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Fate Mapping

●Fate maps are diagrams showing organs and other 
structures that arise from each region of an embryo
●Classic studies using frogs indicated that cell 
lineage in germ layers is traceable to blastula cells

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

●Later studies of C. elegans used the ablation 
(destruction) of single cells to determine the 
structures that normally arise from each cell
●The researchers were able to determine the lineage 
of each of the 959 somatic cells in the worm

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Axis Formation

●A body plan with bilateral symmetry is found across 
a range of animals
●This body plan exhibits asymmetry across the 
dorsal-ventral and anterior-posterior axes
●The right-left axis is largely symmetrical

Yesterday, we talked about this in the fruit fly with 
the bicoid example. Today we look at axis formation 
in vertebrates.

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Skip to picture

●The anterior-posterior axis of the frog embryo is 
determined during oogenesis
●The animal-vegetal asymmetry indicates where the 
anterior-posterior axis forms (animal is embryo, 
vegetal is yolk)
●The dorsal-ventral axis is not determined until 
fertilization

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

●Upon fusion of the egg and sperm, the egg surface 
rotates with respect to the inner cytoplasm
●This cortical rotation brings molecules from one 
area of the inner cytoplasm of the animal 
hemisphere to interact with molecules in the vegetal 
cortex
●This leads to expression of dorsal- and ventral-
specific gene expression

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

OTHER VERTEBRATES

●In chicks, gravity is involved in establishing the 
anterior-posterior axis
●Later, pH differences between the two sides of the 
blastoderm establish the dorsal-ventral axis
●In mammals, experiments suggest that orientation 
of the egg and sperm nuclei before fusion may help 
establish embryonic axes

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Restricting Developmental Potential

●Hans Spemann performed experiments to 
determine a cell’s developmental potential (range of 
structures to which it can give rise)
●Embryonic fates are affected by distribution of 
determinants and the pattern of cleavage
●The first two blastomeres of the frog embryo are 
totipotent (can develop into all the possible cell 
types)

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

●In mammals, embryonic cells remain totipotent until 
the 8-cell stage, much longer than other organisms
●Progressive restriction of developmental potential is 
a general feature of development in all animals
●In general tissue-specific fates of cells are fixed by 
the late gastrula stage

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Cell Fate Determination and Pattern 

Formation by Inductive Signals
●As embryonic cells acquire distinct fates, they 
influence each other’s fates by induction

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

The “Organizer” of Spemann and 

Mangold

●Spemann and Mangold transplanted tissues 
between early gastrulas and found that the 
transplanted dorsal lip triggered a second 
gastrulation in the host
●The dorsal lip functions as an organizer of the 
embryo body plan, inducing changes in surrounding 
tissues to form notochord, neural tube, and so on

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Formation of the Vertebrate Limb 
●Inductive signals play a major role in pattern 
formation, development of spatial organization
●The molecular cues that control pattern formation 
are called positional information
●This information tells a cell where it is with respect 
to the body axes
●It determines how the cell and its descendents 
respond to future molecular signals

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

●The wings and legs of chicks, like all vertebrate 
limbs, begin as bumps of tissue called limb buds
●The embryonic cells in a limb bud respond to 
positional information indicating location along three 
axes 

●Proximal-distal axis
●Anterior-posterior axis
●Dorsal-ventral axis

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

●One limb bud–regulating region is the apical 
ectodermal ridge (AER)
●The AER is thickened ectoderm at the bud’s tip
●The second region is the zone of polarizing 
activity (ZPA)
●The ZPA is mesodermal tissue under the ectoderm 
where the posterior side of the bud is attached to the 
body

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

●Tissue transplantation experiments support the 
hypothesis that the ZPA produces an inductive signal 
that conveys positional information indicating 
“posterior”
●Sonic hedgehog is an inductive signal for 
anterior/posterior limb development – gradient from 
ZPA
●Hox genes also play roles during limb pattern 
formation

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Cilia and Cell Fate

●Ciliary function is essential for proper specification of cell fate 
in the human embryo
●Motile cilia play roles in left-right specification (always sweep 
fluid to the left, creating slight asymmetry of morphogens on 
left-right axis)
●Monocilia (nonmotile cilia) are on every cell and act as 
antenna to receive signal proteins (such as Sonic hedgehog) 

● play roles in normal kidney development

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Agenda 12/4

●Gregor Mendel – online cd activity – 4-2-2 (15 minutes) - keep a list of 
main ideas
●Mendel slides (skim Ch. 14 Pwpt. Slides 19-35) (10 min)
●Genetics Practice Problems Key questions page 1? (10 min)
●Do Dihybrid cross together using rule of multiplication/addition (5min)
●Modes of Inheritance/Pedigrees (slides follow) (15 min)
●X-Linked color-blind problem (Sex-Linked Review) - last 5 min
Homework –
Punnett square practice pg. 2 due tomorrow
Ch. 14 Notes and concept checks due tomorrow, Ch. 14 online assignment 
due Monday (long! 2hrs)
Ch. 15 Notes, concept checks due next Thurs and online assignment due 
next Friday
●Next Unit Test (Ch. 11-15, 18.4, 47.3) approx. 12/16, be working on review 
manual chapters 11-15 (will be collected day of test)

Review Manual Assignment

Ch. 11 and 12:
p. 73-75, Level 1 Q #22-34, Level 2 Q#2,7,8

Ch. 13-15:
p. 114-118 all Level 1 (22 total) and Level 2 (7 
total)

Ch. 18.4: p. 148 #35

Ch. 47.3: p. 257 #35

●Dominance/recessiveness relationships 
have three important points.

1.  They range from complete dominance, 

though various degrees of incomplete 
dominance, to codominance.

2.  They reflect the mechanisms by which 

specific alleles are expressed in the 
phenotype and do not involve the ability of 
one allele to subdue another at the level of 
DNA.

3.  They do not determine or correlate with 

the relative abundance of alleles in a 
population.

Copyright © 2002 Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Benjamin Cummings

Degrees of Dominance 

● Complete dominance occurs when phenotypes 

of the heterozygote and dominant homozygote are 
identical

● In incomplete dominance, the phenotype of F1 
hybrids is somewhere between the phenotypes of 
the two parental varieties

● In codominance, two dominant alleles affect the 

phenotype in separate, distinguishable ways

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Multiple Alleles

●Most genes exist in populations in more than two 

allelic forms

●For example, the  four phenotypes of the ABO 
blood group in humans are determined by three 
alleles for the enzyme (I) that attaches A or B 
carbohydrates to red blood cells: IA, IB, and i.

●The enzyme encoded by the IA allele adds the A 
carbohydrate, whereas the enzyme encoded by the 
IB allele adds the B carbohydrate; the enzyme 
encoded by the i allele adds neither

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

X-linked (Sex-linked) Diseases

●Remind yourself how to draw the Punnett 
square for these – what do you need first?

12/5

Warm-up: next slide
Be sure kids can log into network
Put up key to Genetics Practice Problems pg. 2 - check answers
Slides on last types of inheritance and pedigrees
Work on your own - 2 assignments: (I check Ch. 14 notes)
1) Continue Case study with the next handout

● do all of Part III - will need to read about Stem cells in Ch. 20. p. 415-417

2) Research tumor suppressor genes - answer on binder paper 
● Read pgs. 374-5 & answer “what do tumor suppressors do in the cell cycle?” 
● Specific examples of mutated tumor suppressor genes that may lead to cancer  
include human papillomavirus (HPV), retinoblastoma protein(Rb), BRCA 1 and 
BRCA2, and p53.  Split these up among your group members and create a 
written summary of your research findings.

Homework - 
Genetics Practice Problems packet fully done for Monday  
Ch. 14 online assignment due Monday (long! 2hrs)
Ch. 15 Notes, concept checks due next Thurs and online assignment due next 
Friday
●Next Unit Test (Ch. 11-15, 18.4, 47.3) approx. 12/16, be working on review 
manual chapters 11-15 (will be collected day of test)

Dihybrid Crosses – Using Probability – 

Rules of Multiplication and Addition

In a dihybrid cross of 2 yellow pea plants 
with round seeds, 64 offspring are 
produced.  Approximately how many of 
these offspring will be: 
Yellow with round seeds? 
Yellow with wrinkled seeds?
Green with round seeds?
Green with wrinkled seeds?

●Dominance/recessiveness relationships 
have three important points.

1.  They range from complete dominance, 

though various degrees of incomplete 
dominance, to codominance.

2.  They reflect the mechanisms by which 

specific alleles are expressed in the 
phenotype and do not involve the ability of 
one allele to subdue another at the level of 
DNA.

3.  They do not determine or correlate with 

the relative abundance of alleles in a 
population.

Copyright © 2002 Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Benjamin Cummings

Pleiotropy

●Most genes have multiple phenotypic effects, a 

property called pleiotropy 

●For example, pleiotropic alleles are responsible 

for the multiple symptoms of certain hereditary 
diseases, such as cystic fibrosis and sickle-cell 
disease

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Epistasis

More than one gene

● In epistasis, a gene at one locus alters the 

phenotypic expression of a gene at a second 
locus

● For example, in Labrador retrievers and many 

other mammals, coat color depends on two 
genes

● One gene determines the pigment color (with 

alleles B for black and b for brown)

● The other gene (with alleles C for color and c 
for no color) determines whether the pigment 
will be deposited in the hair

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Polygenic Inheritance

More than one gene

●Quantitative characters are those that vary in 

the population along a continuum

●Quantitative variation usually indicates polygenic 
inheritance, an additive effect of two or more genes 
on a single phenotype

●Skin color in humans is an example of polygenic 

inheritance

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

          NATURE VS. NURTURE

●Phenotype depends on environment and genes.

● A single tree has leaves that vary in size, shape, and 
greenness, depending on exposure to wind and sun.

● For humans, nutrition influences height, exercise alters 

build, sun-tanning darkens the skin, and experience 
improves performance on intelligence tests.

● Even identical twins, genetic equals, accumulate 
phenotypic differences as a result of their unique 
experiences.

●The relative importance of genes and the 
environment in influencing human characteristics is 
a very old and hotly contested debate.

Copyright © 2002 Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Benjamin Cummings

Nature and Nurture: The Environmental 
Impact on Phenotype

● Another departure from Mendelian genetics 
arises when the phenotype for a character 
depends on environment as well as genotype

● The norm of reaction is the phenotypic range 

of a genotype influenced by the environment
● For example, hydrangea flowers of the same 

genotype range from blue-violet to pink, 
depending on soil acidity

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

Pedigree Analysis

● A pedigree is a family tree that describes the 

interrelationships of parents and children 
across generations

● Inheritance patterns of particular traits can be 

traced and described using pedigrees

© 2011 Pearson Education, Inc.

